I'm going to switch the tape here and check the voice.
What's the weather like out there in California?
Oh, it's just finished raining and now it's blue skies and sunshine and everything's clear
and the mountains have got snow on them which is sort of nice.
All right.
Great, I've got a slight.
Okay, we have the tape rolling on this end.
Okay, I'm not quite sure what I'm supposed to do with this voice.
Well what I'll do is I'll simply ask questions and then you just answer them.
And if you want to make comments or anything like that, that's exactly what we're here
for.
Okay.
Oh, by the way, I mean stop the machine.
Got the machine going again.
Okay, in the mode in God's eye, your co-author Larry Niven and you were trying to write what
I believe you called the epitome of a first contact novel.
You must have had to develop quite a bit of background information for that, didn't you?
Yeah, we probably have as much material in note for that book as there is in the book.
Not sure what to do with it anymore.
We had several notebooks for the stuff.
Civilizations and histories and the rest of it.
And you know like developing the Modi culture?
Yeah, well we had to come up with a rationale for why are they that way and how did they
get to be that way and so forth.
And that was always started with an asymmetrical alien, which was something that Larry had
left over from a story along that he'd never finished writing.
And I can't work without knowing why things happen.
I've learned a lot more able to believe in six impossible things before breakfast than
I am.
So he can sit there and write a story that he hadn't really believed had happened.
I'm not very good at that.
I generally don't, I can't stay interested in something unless I think it might happen,
which means that I have to work out how it could have happened.
So we ended up getting quite a lot of stuff on the subject of the Modi.
And finally I can see they're a fairly self-consistent set of aliens.
Probably there's no such thing, but their evolution could easily have come about I think.
Why did you and Niven choose to put Modi and Ghazaya in your future history of the codominium?
Oh, I don't know.
We were looking, I didn't believe in his future history.
His known space theory is, in my judgment, holds you to drive a truck through.
I just don't think it can happen.
Neither does he, by the way.
So, which doesn't mean it's not interesting, because it is.
It's interesting and a lot of fun.
But again, I have this problem of not really being able to do a lot of work on things that I don't believe in.
So we built this surround mud that's around the Soanite already had, and it worked out.
How did you put together the codominium?
No, I don't know.
About the same way we're putting it together in the real world, isn't it?
It looks now as if the alliance seems to be the United States and China,
but it could just about as easily given a few changes in the structure of government in Russia.
It'd been the United States and Russia against China, couldn't it?
Yeah, very possibly.
And in fact, that was a very logical way for things to have gone back in the 60s,
when the Chinese were running around trying to tear the world apart, you may remember.
Yes.
They've got reasonable and the Russians didn't, as it happened,
but it could just as easily have gone the other way.
So really, you took and extrapolated our existing political situation.
Yeah, well, I'm not convinced it won't happen yet, of course.
I mean, Russia has got to go out of business one of these days,
and who knows who takes over over there?
They don't know. Why should we know?
I don't suppose there's anybody in the world who knows who's going to be in charge when Brezhnev goes out of business, right?
Right.
Including Brezhnev.
The United States at least has got a certain amount of stability in which you can make a fairly short list of people who are likely to be president.
And the mechanism by which they get there is fairly well known.
The mechanism by which you get to be the unanimous choice of the Russian people to be their fearless leader
is not really known even to the Russians, is it?
Not from what I can tell.
Well, you know, Berea thought he had it set up at one point, and his gun stuck in his pocket quite literally.
They had a shootout at a cabinet meeting, and he lost.
So you take the coefficient or friction of a gun fight against a wool suit, and you follow that in as one of the important variables of human history, right?
Right.
Since if Berea had been in charge, heaven knows what happened. I suspect the codominium would have come about if Berea had taken over instead of Khrushchev.
He was just a cynical power broker. I doubt that he believed in very much of anything.
You have a background in political science, don't you?
Well, among others.
Yeah.
I've noticed in your work you do have, you base some of your story around the political intrigue that goes on.
Yeah, I'm not sure I understand why that calls for comment.
No, I was just making a comment.
Back to a better question.
How did the mechanics of collaborating with another author like Niven work?
Well, we get asked that so often that I don't really feel much like talking about it anymore.
We've gone through this 150 times, at every convention, everywhere else.
The best thing I can say is we just do it, you know?
Okay, how about a note?
You sit down and you write the book, and some people work together and some can't.
Okay. How about getting some background information on you then?
Okay.
Yeah, well, I used to write books before I took up saving the space program for a living.
It seems to be what I'm doing lately is I'm sitting here with this telephone glued in my ear.
Just before you called, I said I've been on a phone in Washington for two hours.
Yesterday all day.
We're running around trying to rebuild the space program and still live within the budget cuts.
It's not easy to do.
I'm a chairman of a citizen's advisory group that's working on plans for the administration,
but we don't, that doesn't mean you can guarantee that they're going to take care of it.
We have a problem right now in that the administration wants to chop back the budget,
which you can certainly, they've got to do.
The country cannot go on like this.
At the same time, if we don't keep up some investments in high technology,
we're not going to have anything to live off of.
You've got to invest something once in a while, you know?
And unfortunately, the structure of the government and the tax situation and the rest of it is such that you are not going to get private investment in things as inherently risky as space technology.
Because they don't let you keep into the profits.
Profits are nasty word nowadays, so who wants to risk everything on something that you can't win on?
So you're going to have to have government research until they change some of the laws I'm going to do with the tax structure.
And if we don't do that, then I guess we'll sit here and become, we're already an underdeveloped nation.
And if our major export is agriculture, we're beginning to import high technology.
We're buying airplanes from overseas now.
Can you imagine that?
Eastern Airlines is now flying a thing called the Airbus, which is made in Europe.
American domestic airlines are flying foreign airplanes.
We're importing computers, and we're going to be doing more of that pretty soon.
We're underdeveloped countries.
We don't start doing some investment, we're going to stay that way.
So that's what I have been doing for the last couple of weeks, and which is why I don't have my lot of thoughts on the subject of science fiction.
Because I'm still sitting here in the eye of a storm trying to balance about 35 different balls in the air and get a rational program for high technology investments that's it.
You talked about a lot of those same things in your book a step further out, didn't you?
Yeah, right. That's one reason why I seem to be involved in doing some of these things and being in charge of a, not in charge of, but sort of ringmaster tour.
To a fairly large group of scientists and engineers is because of that book, attracted a certain amount of attention.
Yeah, in that book you state that our, I guess, destiny is mankind is linked to our expanding ourselves into space.
Yeah, well, there's that in a step further out, and I've said in other columns and other places, how long is the future?
We presented this, Bassoni and I presented this in a paper to an annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
We think of it as a reasonably important philosophical question. How long is the future?
If it's the way matters and the forester and the limits to growth people think, it's only a couple of hundred years, then there is no point in worrying about it and we might as well eat, drink and be merry, right?
But if on the other hand the future is another a billion generations, a hundred billion years, then we are not the same species as an outfit that's going to live another 200 years, are we?
And if mankind's future is too is a hundred billion years and there's no reason why it should not be a hundred billion years, then we're going to have to outlive the Earth and indeed outlive the Sun and the Solar System.
We may even have to outlive this galaxy.
Now there's nothing in principle that keeps us from doing that. I know of nothing that could stop us other than ourselves.
I've said this a lot of times, but I don't know how you can't say it too often.
One of the most ironic things that ever happened was that just after we went to the moon, they held in Stockholm a conference whose theme title was Only One Earth.
And that's insane. We don't live on only one Earth.
We live if we want to in a system that's got nine planets and I used to say 38 moons, but now I think it's up to about 50.
And a million asteroids and a million comets.
That's a lot of resources out there, plus an enormous thermonuclear generator, which the Environmental Protection Association would never let you activate that thermonuclear generator out there as far too dangerous.
We call it the Sun.
But if we're going to have a hundred billion years future, we've got to get off this ball and we better do it pretty quick because it's fairly obvious that if we stay cooked up here on it long enough, we're going to do something to ourselves that'll keep us from going out there.
So runs for some of us like me seem to get a little shrill about it sometimes. It's a feeling of urgency here because right now we have the resources. Who knows how long we'll have them?
Yeah, I was wondering, is there some sort of timetable that we're sort of set into in getting into space?
Well, I don't know what you mean by timetable set into. Who would set it?
Well, are there any sort of resources, restrictions that would allow us to get into space now, but maybe not later on?
Pure population pressures. If you believe in the limits to growth model, we don't have very many more generations as well.
If you believe those models, you're going to have tremendous pressures to widely distribute the capital.
Right? At the moment, Western civilization is a fairly wealthy island in the middle of a pretty large sea of poverty.
There are enormous pressures to sort of redistribute the wealth and if you do, then everybody is more or less miserable. There will be very little wealth.
Now, it's unlikely we're going to actually do that because very few people really pop rise themselves voluntarily.
But on the other hand, that's a pretty ripe situation for breeding wars. Bringing back the codominium, by the way.
My suspicion is that the United States and the Soviet Union would rather ally to keep the so-called third world countries from impoverishing them than they would.
You see what I'm getting at.
Genuine foreign aid is, the United States has a fairly good record of generosity on that, but it is still fairly small compared to our national budget.
We do not give until it hurts much, nor are we likely to, nor do I think we should, because if we impoverish ourselves, no one will have the resources to go to space.
It's a very expensive proposition going to space, right?
Right.
It takes a peculiar combination of extra wealth, educated people, high talent, machine shops and resources, and the determination by somebody to do it.
All of those things have to come together at the same time, and that just seems sufficiently fragile to me.
In fact, the whole civilization seems fairly fragile to me.
Roberto Vaca wrote a pretty good book called The Cutting Dark Age, in which he discusses a number of fairly catastrophic scenarios, starting with, well, I don't know, widespread power failures.
In which Western civilization just essentially sort of collapses back into a level approximating the, I don't know, 1900 to 1920 era.
Everybody's reasonably well off, but nobody's got a lot, and there certainly isn't enough to go to space.
A lot of autonomously small communities living off the land counters and so forth, and it considerably decreases in population.
As he says, it's going off and living in a country in small towns without modern convenience and everything is the sort of thing people do now for fun, but it's not very amusing as a way of life, but it may well be the way of life.
You can easily see this kind of thing.
Larry and I wrote a book called Lucifer's Hammer about a natural disaster that can bring about much the same kind of result.
I'm sure that's a rare one, I doubt to you that the world's going to be whammed with a comet, but on the other hand, Alvarez at Berkeley, the business is a Nobel Prize, the business with Berkeley has just come up with a fairly convincing proof that that's what happened to the dinosaur about 100 million years ago,
is that the earth really did get whammed with something big, and it killed them all off.
And furthermore, he seems to have demonstrated that it happens about every 100 million years, and to last what happened 100 million years ago, which doesn't mean it's going to happen this year.
But I can think of a lot of things, wars to just general disorganization.
We keep building bureaucratic structure until we can't support the weight of it any longer.
That would use up all the resources that might take us to space, and if they're gone, how do you get there?
The interesting thing, I mean, space is expensive.
Each Apollo shot cost almost 15 days supply of cigarettes.
The amount of money that was spent on an Apollo would have kept the United States in liquor for a whole week.
It's expensive.
It's not very expensive compared to a lot of things we do, but it's still expensive.
Yes, sir. Okay, I was making sure that you were finished.
I liked your gentle, somewhat gentle sarcasm there about the liquor and the cigarettes. That was nice.
Even though there are some restrictions on us, you've talked about in your articles that we can survive, and if I might quote you, we can survive with style.
How might that be brought about?
Well, that can give you some alternate scenarios.
But we are trying to convince the President and the administration of them for essentially the same amount of money we're spending on the space program now.
Redirected slightly, and with a little added to it, it doesn't take much.
To give you the following scenario, we could have by 1988 a space industrial park, which is essentially a housekeeping satellite that has industrial facilities and power and oxygen.
And which private companies could go up and put their own modules on to it to make things.
And I give you some ideas of things you can make in space you can't make.
The use of ethical drug processes are enormous in space, and some drugs like uriconase are worth a million dollars a kilogram.
Now, you can make those in fairly large quantities in space because you get perfect mixing and you get good temperature control.
And there are all kinds of reasons why space turns out to be a good place to do certain very high value intrinsically low-yield chemical processes.
You can get deals that are thousands of times better than they are on Earth.
Turbine blades, magnets, people talk about ball bearings.
It's not so clear that you can actually profitably manufacture ball bearings in space because you can make them on Earth.
Now, we don't have to play foam steels, ways of making steel beams that are shot through with air bubbles in such a way that you or I could pick one of them up, or things 10 feet long by put that we could carry around with you, but it's just about as strong as if it were solid.
So that sort of thing.
Very long, complex.
There are a lot of products that we are fairly certain would be profitable, but fairly certain is not good enough that anybody's going to risk going to all the expense of doing that by themselves.
But if you've got already the facility so that you're only having to spend, the private company's only having to spend the marginal cost of this, of adding their own module onto it and paying some rent to the government of the landlord.
Then it becomes a much more attractive proposition, particularly if you give them some decent tax breaks.
Now this can all be in place by 1988, but a year 2000 we can be manufacturing things in space from materials taken from mines on the move.
And all this at a level of US expenditure that is not large compared to what we're doing now.
It's in the order of maybe 10 or 12 billion a year.
Small potatoes.
Not in the United States spent like 5% of its national budget over a period of 10 years on the Panama Canal.
And I think everybody believes that was a good thing to do.
We did well by doing good.
We don't have to spend anything like that.
It's 2.5% of our national budget.
On space over the next 20 years could probably make the whole world rich.
Certainly could keep us fabulously wealthy.
Because the, you were talking about when you begin to manufacture things using power from space and materials from the moon, you're talking about actual new wealth.
Something that has never existed on this planet before.
You're actually bringing wealth to this planet.
And that's quite a thing.
This is all very possible.
I mean it's not dreams, it's not fantasies, there's nothing ridiculous about it.
You have permanent moon base by the year 2000, you begin to get lunar colonies.
I suspect that people would choose to live there.
Some will, some won't, some will.
I'm sure I could find 500 highly qualified families that would be willing to move to the moon tomorrow.
No one would never come back.
They're very qualified people.
In fact, I think very seriously about doing it myself.
It's a new frontier and there are always people who like frontier atmospheres.
From there, the takeoff is clear.
There's no going back from that.
And we are then insured that there is no single disaster.
They wipe out the whole human race.
It's taken a pretty good step towards our fulfilling our national...
destiny as a human race.
A building our 100 billion year future.
And I would think that doing something like that would be attractive to the president.
And I suspect that my suspicion is that the statesman who put us in the space permanently
would be remembered a lot longer than Isabella the Great and Prince Henry the Navigator.
I mean, would literally be remembered through billions of years of human history.
The man who put us permanently into space.
Along with John Kennedy.
And this is a...
seemed to me like a fairly attractive proposition for some statesman.
And it does not seem to me like an unpopular idea with the public.
Look at the sales of what the Star Wars is still the biggest money maker of all time.
Movie?
Star Trek is still on in syndication 12, 14 years after the...
It is ridiculous.
There's no such thing as science fiction books.
I've got books in print that have been going around for 10, 12 years and I'm a relative newcomer to the field.
There are some science fiction books in print that are 30 years old.
Now, who won the Pulitzer Prize for literature 12 years ago?
I bet it's books not in print.
You're not talking about something that's unpopular with the people of this country, I think.
High technology is very popular.
And look, you took a look at the sales of science magazines now.
Where you turn around is a new science magazine.
It would seem to me that here is a marvelous opportunity for somebody to go out and do well by doing good.
Become one of the most famous people in history by doing something that is politically very popular.
God knows it didn't hurt John Kennedy any.
Yeah, well, I definitely hope you're right.
You've speculated about several different types of, I guess you would call launching systems for rockets.
And one of them is the laser launch system.
I believe you wrote the first story that concerned itself with that.
That's probably true.
Yeah.
Where did that idea come from?
Where was it developed?
It was called Cantruits, who's by the way, Dutch Cantruits is on the board of the Alphabets Society.
Along with people like Martin Minsky and Robert Heinlein.
I strongly recommend the Alphabets Society to people, by the way.
I think Cantruits first came up with that idea at Avco Everett a couple of years ago.
And in a film I have two engineers, one of them named Perry, and I don't remember the other one I saw to say.
Did some development work on the concept and have actually flown some little models using lasers and power sources.
The laser sits on the ground. It's something like it was only much larger, was described in Motengard's asks.
It looks like a perfectly reasonable system. It certainly would work on the moon.
Using, you'd have to ablate materials out of the rocket chamber.
It looks like it ought to work on the earth. There's nothing, say, scale models that work, dollar theory works.
Again, it's expensive to start with.
There are a lot of ways of getting the space other than disintegrating totem poles.
But you have to first decide that you want to go there.
And one of the things that we, the Alphabets Society, Citizens Advisory Council, and the other things that are trying to convince the administration,
is that really the business of NASA should be to develop these new technologies, rather than doing spectacular missions.
Missions are fine, but we need right now some building blocks and technology.
And of course you need some missions to keep people interested in the program.
But technology should be more important than missions.
And there are a lot of technologies that ought to be being investigated and which really are not being looked at very strongly now,
because it's in nobody's interest to look at them.
You can't get rich off of them because you're talking about things that won't happen for, if everything goes well,
you can't start making money at them for 10 or 15 years.
And there are a few stockholders who invest in things for a 10 or 15-year-old, a year, pay off.
There used to be, there used to be, as Milton Friedman and his son David Friedman,
as a friend of mine, we've had this argument many times, he thinks the government should get the heck out of everything.
And as David points out, that in the last century there were a lot of investments that were not expected to mature for 10 or 15, 20 years.
But nowadays people don't have much confidence in the future, so they don't.
And you go to the Harvard School of Business or the Wharton School of Finance or some of these famous management schools,
they teach you management techniques that really eventually, with your looking at not only the annual report, but the quarterly report, you know.
And as a consequence, it's hard to find anybody who's interested in investing in something for the next generation,
which means it's practically got to be done by the government.
And that used to be, I thought, the definition of statesmanship anyway, wasn't it?
The politician looks at the next election, the statesman looks at the next generation.
Probably the biggest defect of democracy is that we don't have any institutionalized mechanisms for looking after our grandchildren's welfare.
And that meant our kids.
Aristocracies do, monarchies do, because it visibly is there.
You're now in a king sitting there and he's looking at this kid running around the palace and thinking, well, that boy's going to have his job on these days.
And if I do certain things, it's going to make it very tough on him, so I better do something else so that it won't be so hard on him.
But we haven't got anybody who thinks that way in the end of democracy.
And it just seems to me somebody had better start looking out for the future or they ain't going to be one.
Are the, by the time that they do it all might be too late to do anything about it?
Well, that's the scary thing of course, is how long will we have this fabulous wealth.
Right now we have resources all over the place.
It just, you know, we can afford it easily.
I'm not kidding when I say that for, you know, let me raise the liquor tax by 50% and put all of our money in the bank.
And I can go right into the space program and I can make the country so bloom and rich that you can probably do away with taxes in another generation.
That's the ridiculous part about it, is that you're talking about sources of new wealth that never happened before.
The nearest analogy I can think of is Alaska, where they're setting on so much oil they're abolishing all of state taxes and now they're trying to figure out what else to do with the money, you know?
They don't need to worry about it, the federal government will figure out some way to take it away from us.
And they'll spend it for nothing and throw it away.
They will never invest anything anymore.
It's terrifying.
But you're setting on what amounts to a gold mine, it's a moon out there, it's a whole planet of resources.
You know, the space is raining soup.
It's just a matter of going out and doing a little development and picking up some soup bowls.
But it is not, it's not fast return on investment.
It's not something I can put my money in now and go cash out a year from now.
It's not my, I put it in and my kids will come out well.
But somewhere shouldn't we be doing some of that?
It took 15 years to build a Panama Canal, wasn't it worth doing?
We?
Very good point. Could you hold for just a second please?
Well, yeah, we're gonna wrap this up pretty quick.
Yes, sir.
Back with you, sir.
Okay.
Yeah, let's get in a little bit to King David's spaceship.
And then we can go ahead and wrap it up here.
All right, are you ready?
All right.
You seem to have an interest in medieval cultures.
You used them in the Janissaries and in King David's spaceship.
Where did you get the interest in medieval cultures?
Well, I did a lot of work in history getting my doctorate in clinical science.
I've always been sort of interested in these things.
My friend, Paul Anderson, once called me a 14th century liberal.
Because I have some interest I've had in the high Middle Ages.
Those were times when people felt more integrated into their culture.
Loyalties were not.
What was it in the song?
In the King Charlie Golden Days when loyalty no harm meant.
They're nice things to write about.
And I think I see some signs of a kind of return to feudal institutions.
We've built a number of them in this country.
They're not normally recognized as feudal institutions, but a labor union certainly is as an example.
Certain structures of corporate loyalty and associations of that kind.
Things that institutions and in many cases people that stand between you and an all powerful government.
It's a lot easier to be loyal to things like that.
A lot of our problems we've had in this country.
Tended to cut all of the ties of loyalty between citizens so that you end up with the only thing that you're supposed to have the loyalty to.
This nebulous national government in Washington which acts in such a contemptible manner quite often.
That it's pretty hard for you to work up integrated enthusiasm for them.
That's part of it.
That part of it has always fascinated me a little bit as to the conflict of cultures.
What happens if you take somebody with modern ideas and throw them into a situation with many different types of structures.
That's mostly it.
Yes.
In your writing in King David's spaceship and also I guess in the codominium future history.
They're all set in the same future history then.
You chose empires as the type of government that would prevail.
Why is that so?
Well, empires seem to me to be the most normal form of human government in the sense that it is almost certainly the until this century was the most common one.
Nationalistic kingdoms or nationalistic tribal government of one kind or another in which the loyalties are basically true people like me.
They tend to be pretty brutal things if you're one of the outsiders.
It seems to me that one of the most brilliant inventions of mankind in which we have had for a long time its origins are really kind of lost in antiquity.
We have some legends about them.
The development of a mechanism by which people can actually have loyalties that cut across tribal and some of your clan type of grounds.
Now, democracies theoretically have that but in practice they don't seem to generate it very much.
They sometimes do but they're fairly unstable.
At least they have been.
Wealthy republics have historically not lasted very long.
We've just about got the record and there's some doubt about us and whether we'll remain a republic or remain wealthy.
Now, you can make a case for saying the characteristic form of human government is the empire and the characteristic size of an empire is that it grows until it runs up against another one.
Now, you may case against that too but if you look at human history that certainly is a proposition that is defensible.
That's point one.
Secondly, it's very hard to see how you can have an interstellar civilization that isn't something like that.
You might have a council or something.
You've got to have however something at the center which has a fairly automatic means of succession to get from there.
Because you're not going to have elections spread out over star systems that are separated by years of travel time.
And again, you look back and well, have we ever had any governments that were that way?
And yes, we have and in every case they tended to the imperial form.
You had the Roman system and you had the British system of the last century and the British one deliberately went from a monarchical tribal kind of government.
Victoria of England to a frank model of the late days of the Roman Republic or the early days of the Roman Empire.
I mean it was deliberately modeled after it even.
The queen becoming the queen emperor and so forth.
I don't know of any other systems that have done this.
I mean there's been duels for any great length of time and which were spread across many cultures and vast distances and so forth.
So that you could almost say that what I have put in those books is a very conservative projection of what life could be like.
I understand that it's a fairly radical looking one to people who have been brought up as American kids are brought up with almost no sense of history.
And in fact almost a religious avoidance of the subject of history.
But given much exposure to things historical.
So I think the question would have been the other way around.
You would wonder you would you would ask what else you could have put there if you would try to have a civilization that spanned many stars communications were long in time.
If you see what it is.
Yes I do.
Now a different kind of culture would with eventually I don't suspect if you had instantaneous communication.
But I very carefully excluded that possibility as indeed the universe seems to exclude that possibility.
OK.
Yeah that would with instantaneous communications that would obviously make other other forms possible.
Maybe not likely but it'd make them possible.
You may argue of course that that that the difficulties of holding disparate groups together are sufficiently.
There that that it won't happen and that you'll have maybe a solar system or even a planet or is the natural size of a political unit and there won't be any real.
You know that and then nothing larger than that will exist.
To which I can only say that that's quite possibly the case.
But at the same time if you've got if something else came into being it would then have almost no competition with it.
You see what I mean.
If something did evolve a mechanism that could be bigger than that that it would almost automatically grow until it had encompassed everything around it.
And that in fact is the history of the total and then the empire grew from it.
To some extent political units grow dependent in large amount upon.
Or take a gase put it very nicely in the in the in the results of the masses when he said in the last analysis political authority rests upon the shoulders of the junior officers.
If you if you got the lieutenants and captains on your side you can pretty well dang near do anything you want.
And if you don't you can't.
Because they're the ones that the troops usually obey the troops don't really care that much about the general.
But they'll usually follow that their own sergeants and their sergeants will usually follow their own officers.
Well if that's the case you're talking about a fairly restricted group which is that there's a young people typically at least up until now at least young men in fact at the ages of 18 to 25.
And that psychology is fairly easily known and the mechanisms by which you get them to be loyal to people and institutions and so forth has been studied over the course of the long course of history.
You know in courses that they now teach called military psychology and leadership which they used to teach they don't teach that anymore nowadays.
Modern army all these guys are supposed to be technicians and nobody seems to know anything about leading troops which is a dreadful mistake.
So they're all pinned towards personal loyalties and once again historically royal families tend to if they have acted in a fairly intelligent way tend to be able to build fairly strong loyalties.
Yeah.
By the way I say typically male because I think women are too smart to be fooled by a lot of the tricks that have been developed by men.
You know you get women to fight for their houses but to go off and get killed for a banner or a flag and a song is easy to talk young men into that and then talk young ladies into it.
I think you're correct.
They're smart enough you know in many ways.
And if you want to go into sociobiology on it it would be enormously surprising to me to discover that that five million years of pre-civilization old history has produced such disparate character traits in all the other between the sections of all the other mammalian species except us.
No one is right.
Mine would suppose that Tom Katz has the same temperament as Tabby Katz right.
I mean nobody believes that.
Everybody knows better.
Nobody believes that male dogs and female dogs have the same temperament or is equally trainable or anything else.
But we are supposed nowadays to believe that of a human being.
Well maybe but I would.
You know that's a surprising fact if we if true.
Temperamentally I think they are the same when they are not of any other mammalian group that I know.
I just have one more question sir.
If I let me shut the machine down for a second.